good afternoon and welcome back to
downing street for today's coronavirus
briefing
and i'm joined by the deputy chief
medical officer professor
jonathan van tam and by nhs england's
medical director for primary care
dr nikki kanani before i update you
on the coronavirus response i'd just
like to take you through the latest
data if i could have the slide please
there are still 29 326
patients with kovid in hospitals across
the uk
and as you can see from this slide that
is still more
than either the april or at the november
peaks
and sadly 841 deaths have been reported
on average
each day over the past week
my thoughts are with everyone who's lost
a loved one
to this deadly disease
today i'd like to update you on three
important parts of the coronavirus
response
the first is our next steps on the
vaccination program
it's now two months to the day since
margaret keenan
got her first jab the first person
in the world to be vaccinated with a
clinically authorized vaccine for
coronavirus
we have now as of today vaccinated more
than 12.2
million people that's almost one in four
of all adults across the united kingdom
take up of the vaccines so far has been
significantly better than we hoped for
based on the work we've done before the
vaccination program started and looking
at the
surveys we knew that the uk
had one of the most positive attitudes
to
vaccine uptake but even so we thought
we'd get take up of around 75
i'm really pleased to be able to tell
you that as of midnight last night
among the over 80s we've now given a
first dose to
91 among those aged between 75 and 79
it's 95 and
almost three-quarters of those aged
between 70
and 74 who were the most recent group to
be
invited we've also visited every
eligible care home with older residents
and offered vaccinations to
all their residents and staff so among
eligible care home residents the take-up
is 93
but will not rest until we vaccinate
all those in the most at-risk groups
because vaccines save lives
they protect you and there's increasing
evidence that they protect
all those around you as well the fewer
people who are left
unvaccinated the safer we'll all be
and the more securely we'll be able to
release
restrictions when the time is right
i've been thrilled to see so much
enthusiasm about coming forward for a
jab
and i'm just so pleased that take up has
been so high
but we're not going to rest until all
those who are vulnerable have been
protected
so the nhs and local authorities and the
teams working with them
are doing everything they can to reach
the remaining people in these at-risk
groups
and we'll keep on searching for those
final few percent
even as we expand the offer of a vaccine
to younger age groups
and i'm going to ask dr kanani to say a
few words
more about this project in a moment
we're on track to meet our goal of
offering a vaccine to everyone
in priority groups one to four by the
15th of february which is one week today
before moving on to the other jcvi
priority groups
the nhs has worked hard to contact
everyone
in groups one to four but we want to be
certain
so from today i have a message for
everyone
aged 70 and above until now
we've said please wait for the nhs to
contact you
but now that message is changing
if you live in england and are
70 and over and have not yet
got an appointment to be vaccinated then
please
contact the nhs the easiest way to do
this
is through the national booking service
online at nhs.uk
or if you can't get online then you can
call 119
or you can speak to your local gp
practice
if you're in scotland wales or northern
ireland
we are also on track working together
to meet the goal by the 15th of february
and your local health team will be in
touch
i'm so grateful to the whole team who
are delivering this vaccination program
so brilliantly across the whole united
kingdom
and to everyone who's doing their bit by
bearing their
arms and getting the jab
while we use our vaccination program to
go on the offensive against this virus
it's very important that we keep our
defenses up as well
our testing program has also grown at a
blistering rate
we're now carrying out on average four
and a half
million tests every single week
nhs test and trace is returning 97
of in-person tests by the next day
contact tracing is performing incredibly
well
reaching over 97 of contacts where
details are given
and 98 of those they're reaching within
24 hours
i want to say a massive thank you to the
nhs test and trace team
who've built this extraordinary
capability
almost from scratch even in lockdown
testing to find out where the virus is
is critical to break the chains of
transmission to find those positive
cases
so people can isolate and stop the
spread
today i'm delighted to be able to
announce another step forward to bolster
our onshore test manufacturing
capability
we're joining forces with the
derby-based manufacturer shaw screen
to deliver 20 million rapid tests which
can produce results in 30 minutes
they'll be using our they'll be used in
our asymptomatic testing program
to identify the around one in three
people
who get the virus but have no symptoms
at all yet can still
pass it on this expanded capacity means
we can offer more regular testing to
even more people many employers are
already taking up the offer
of rapid regular workplace testing
which has protected critical workers
like in the nhs
and in schools so that they can keep
going
employers who've introduced workplace
testing tell me that
they find it useful for early
identification of people who have
covered
and so the number of
outbreaks reduces as time goes on and so
lowers the number of people
who are off work with covet this is a
really important part
of what we need to do from today we're
expanding the offer of regular workplace
testing to all businesses with over 50
employees in sectors that are currently
open testing will become even more
important as we exit lockdown when the
time is right
of course for now you must work from
home if you can
but if you can't we want to make sure
that we're providing as much
certainty and confidence as possible
and i'd urge all eligible employers to
take up this offer
you can go online to the portal at gov
dot uk
coronavirus and this will all help to
keep vital services going
and to keep the virus on the back foot
the third thing i want to touch on
is our work to tackle new variants
all viruses mutate over time and part of
controlling any viruses responding
to new variants as they arise we do this
every year with flu for instance
and knowing this we invested in the
genomic
sequencing capability right at the start
of this pandemic because genomic
sequencing is how you identify
new variants we've given the uk
one of the biggest genomic sequencing
capabilities in the world in fact
the uk has provided almost half of all
of the covert sequences
that have been provided worldwide
this genomic capacity has allowed us to
spot variance here at home
and is allowing us to support others to
detect
variants in other parts of the world we
mustn't let a new variant
undo all of the good work that the
vaccine rollout is doing to protect
people now the first line of defense is
to spot
and suppress new variants aggressively
wherever they're found hence the tougher
more
measures at the border and the firm
action we're taking
in those small numbers of areas where
variants of concern have been found in
the community including door-to-door
communications
and enhanced testing and sequencing at
the same time
since the emergence of variants of
concern late last year
we've been working on how vaccines can
be used to tackle them
it is imperative that our vaccination
program
keeps pace with any changes to this
virus
professor van tam will be saying a
little bit more about what we're doing
the work has three parts
first the evidence is that the existing
vaccines
have some effect against new variants
particularly preventing serious illness
and mortality
so the existing vaccine rollout is
mission critical
for tackling new variants too
second we're working with the existing
max vaccine suppliers
on potential booster jabs targeted
specifically at the new variants to
strengthen
this protection further third we're
building onshore uk capacity
including cutting-edge mrna technologies
to give us the ability rapidly to
develop and deploy vaccines
against any new variants or similar new
diseases in the future
we've entered into a new partnership
with the vaccine manufacturer
curvac to develop vaccines that can be
quickly adapted
as new strains are identified just as we
do the flu vaccine each year
i am determined that we build this
capacity
right here securely in the uk
to protect everyone across these islands
not just from new variants
now but in the long term too
we've agreed an initial supply of 50
million doses
to add to the 400 million doses that are
already in our vaccine portfolio
so we'll be prepared for whatever the
future might bring
of course the fewer new cases of
coronavirus
that we have the lower the chance
of a new variant appearing domestically
so the essential message to stay at home
and follow the social distancing rules
is our best defense
right now taking all of this together
what i want to say is this the number of
people in hospital
is still far too high but it is falling
the number of people who are dying from
this disease is also
far too high but that is falling too
we're turning a corner in our battle
against coronavirus
the vaccine rollout is going well and if
you're aged
70 and over and haven't been contacted
yet please get in touch now
and all the time we must be vigilant and
do what it takes to tackle any new
variants that arise
for now the most important thing that
you can do
is get the jab when your time comes stay
at home
protect the nhs and save lives
i'm now going to turn to dr kanani to
set out
the details on increasing that critical
uptake
and making sure that we reach everybody
who is vulnerable to
coronavirus and what we are doing to hit
the target
of making sure we get an offer to
everybody in
priority cohorts one to four by the 15th
of february
thank you very much um so could i start
today by paying tribute to
my nhs colleagues who have been working
tirelessly behind the scenes
um whether you are planning um the
vaccination program behind a screen or
in an office
you're a car park steward shoveling snow
and moving cars around
or you're a member of the practice
management team who is setting up these
clinics
you are part of a historic moment i know
that the adverse weather conditions have
been really tricky
but i also know that that has not
stopped us we have set up over
1500 vaccination sites now around the
country
and that is from mosques to museums from
gurdwaras to
games grounds from cathedrals to
community centres
every eligible care home has now had a
visit but if you're in a care home
and you weren't able to have your
vaccination either because as a resident
you'd been unwell or as a member of
staff you weren't quite ready to say yes
we will come back to visit you because
we want to make sure that everyone can
take up this offer
this weekend we were vaccinating almost
28 000 people
every hour that we were operating that
means that we were doing
everything we can to protect you from
this virus
and the snow has not stopped us we've
had teams in skipton
in yorkshire gp surgeries have created
eight
teams and over the weekend visited
over 300 people in their own houses so
wherever you are
however you need the vaccine if you're
in the priority cohort
you will be offered it this week we'll
be sending out
letters and we'll be making phone calls
to make sure that if you're in that
priority cohort
you will have that offer and if
previously you've had the offer
and you weren't sure and you've changed
your mind now please take up the offer
when you're contacted
because that decision could save your
life
and as secretary of state said until now
we've asked you to wait
because we wanted to contact you for
your vaccination
but if you're over 70 let me be clear
if you've had an offer and you've not
taken it up yet please come forward now
the best way to do this is through the
online booking service through nhs.uk
but if that doesn't work for you you can
also telephone 119
and i also know that our teams made up
of gps nurses pharmacists and more
around the country are waiting to
vaccinate you if you still need your
vaccination this week
can i just remind people that if you're
in the priority groups and you've had a
appointment come through from your gp
and the national booking system
choose one and keep that because it
means that we can make another
appointment
for somebody else so finally the nhs
vaccination program is the most
incredible program that we've rolled out
in history
but we all have a role to play to make
sure that no one gets left behind
so if we've not been in contact with you
and during the priority groups
please get in touch with us thank you
very much
dr kanani and now i'd ask professor van
tam to set out
more details of what we're doing on the
vaccine front
in particular with the new variants
thanks secretary of state
before i say a few words about variants
and vaccines
i'd just like to add my thanks to the
nhs staff and the volunteers as well
who are working the vaccine centers and
uh whenever i can
get out and put a shift in alongside you
it's an enormous privilege to be able to
do so so thank you
now turning to the variants and vaccines
i'll say a few words particularly about
the south african variant
which in the trade we know as b 1.351
and because this has been in the in the
news quite a lot in the last few days
so that south african variant 351 is now
dominant in south africa and causing the
vast majority
of the cases that they encounter
it has been detected in the uk but in
very small numbers and it is not
our dominant virus our dominant virus at
the moment
is a variant which was first identified
in kent
which you'll be aware of and we call
that one be 1.117
and um you will know from
what we saw before christmas with the
um 117 variant that
if it has a distinct transmissibility
advantage
over the predecessor then it can
establish itself
very quickly indeed
but early data on modeling
of b 1.351 does not
suggest this is so does not suggest
that the south african variant has
a distinct transmissibility advantage
over our current virus and because of
that
there is no reason to think the south
african variant
will catch up or overtake our current
virus
in the next few months and that's a
really important point
that being the case our immediate threat
is from our current virus and
there is now plenty of evidence that the
vaccines that we are deploying
are effective against our current
virus so from that perspective
look please don't delay if you're called
take the advantage to protect yourself
against the clear and present danger
against the immediate threat
turning now a bit further afield to the
south african variant
and the future several vaccine
manufacturers
including pfizer the manufacturer of a
vaccine that's deployed here
novovax and janssen with whom the
british government
has arrangements they've already
released
either some preliminary clinical or
serological data
about their vaccines and the south
african variant
and taken as a package they do give me
confidence
that there is still likely to be a
substantial effect of the current
vaccines
in terms of reducing serious illness
even if infections are not as well
prevented
now astrazeneca of course the
uk oxford university vaccine is the one
that has
been in the news most recently but
my feelings about the astrazeneca
vaccine are essentially similar
the south african trial was in young
adults
and reported mild disease
and a reduced level
of protection against infection but that
really
doesn't change my view that it is still
rather likely to have an effect on
severe disease and to people who are
kind of on the edge going well shall i
have this current vaccine
or shall i kind of hang on for you know
a south african variant vaccine when it
arrives
my advice to you is very simple do not
delay have the vaccine that will protect
you against the current threat
and don't worry you can be re-vaccinated
for people who've had a full course of
two vaccines
a revaccination is probably only going
to require one dose
that requires some science work to
confirm it but that is my hunch
and you can be revaccinated and we're
taking a lot of
steps behind the scenes to ensure that
we can be in that position
so should we be engaged in thinking and
planning behind the scenes
for needing variant vaccines at some
point in the future
absolutely yes just as variations to the
virus were inevitable
it's almost inevitable that we would at
some point need variations to the
vaccine
so this is not a big fright it's not a
big surprise
it's something that we have anticipated
for quite some time
is it therefore reasonable to begin to
frame our longer term thinking
about possibly needing an annual or a
biennial
booster in high-risk groups yes
absolutely it is that's the right way to
frame it
the no decisions been made not enough
science
information under the bridge yet but
it is definitely the right way to frame
it so
if you read the headlines and you feel a
bit panicky
or you think there's some kind of
immediate problem
please try and be reassured the better
watch words are
concern of course we're concerned
vigilance yes we're hyper vigilant
and preparation there is a lot going on
behind the scenes
that will become clearer over the course
of time thank you secretary state
thank you very much professor now we'll
now go to questions from the public
and then we'll turn to questions from
the media the first question
from the public is from samantha from
lancashire by video samantha
when are frontline police officers
likely to receive the vaccine
like paramedics they have to go into
many different houses a day
and there is a high risk of either
taking the virus home or passing to one
of the many elderly or vulnerable people
they come into contact with on a daily
basis
thank you very much samantha a very
important question
and i want to thank police colleagues
who are doing so much to
protect us at this time including making
sure
that the rules that we have on social
distancing are enforced
and i'm particularly grateful to the
police for the work that they're doing
on
expanding that enforcement directly
answering
your question we have ensured
through the clinical advice that we've
taken that
the vaccine rollout goes through those
who are most at risk first
so any police officer who is aged over
will be part of the initial rollout
through the
current groups down to uh through what
are we what are called
the jcvi cohorts one to nine from the
joint committee on vaccinations and
immunizations which
advises us on the clinical
basis for the order after that
we will then look at what order we go
next
and we'll consider for instance
questions of
people who are in professions where you
might be have to be in contact with more
people
and the impact of the vaccine on
transmission
and make a decision and publicize it as
soon as we've made that decision
no decision has yet been made for where
we'll go
in what order we'll go after the jcvi
cohorts
at one to nine but we're looking very
closely including at
where the police officers should be in
that order
the next question is from wendy from
london
by text wendy asks will it be possible
for adults to adjust the second dose of
vaccine
to work will it be possible to adjust
the second
dose of vaccine to work more effectively
against the new variants
or could a booster be required next
autumn
jvt definitely one for you yes so thank
you i think i've kind of framed the
answer to your question
in terms of really it's more likely to
be the booster
required next autumn with the new
technologies such as the messenger rna
vaccines
and the adenovirus vector vaccines
that covers pfizer and oxford oxford
astrazeneca
uh respectively you can move pretty fast
to vary the virus in the vaccine
and we're talking about a matter of
weeks rather than a matter of many
months
nevertheless those vaccines still have
to be
tested in a small scale way to make sure
that the immune response
is the same as with the previous version
and then they have to be produced
so i think the notion in your question
wendy of
adjusting the second dose to work more
effectively
is probably not one that's realistic
but an autumn booster if required
is very much on our radar but just to
repeat the point again
your question kind of implies that the
vaccines we've got
aren't going to work against the virus
we have
that is not true the virus we have
is the virus first identified in kent
be 1.117 and
the the vaccines we have are almost
certain to work
against that virus
thanks very much professor van tam next
question is from fergus walsh
at the bbc fergus thanks very much
question for professor van tan do you
think
it will be possible to keep the south
african
variant largely suppressed in the uk
and also what would your message be to
people who may
just see fairly scary headlines about
vaccine about virus variants
and their potential effect on the
efficacy of vaccines
so thank you fergus we have small
numbers of the south african variant in
the uk at the present time
and as i've said i'm not seeing and
the um early modeling data do not
suggest
a a transmissibility advantage for this
virus
so that being the case it's not going to
kind of
overrun or overtake the current
b117 1.117 virus
in the next few months or that is the
most likely scenario that it won't
happen now so from that perspective
i don't think that this is something
that we should
be concerned about right at this point
in time
and i agree with you that the stories
and the headlines around variant
viruses and vaccines are a bit scary
and i wish they weren't we
are watching this and i said before that
the watch word is vigilance and behind
the scenes
for many weeks now the focus of my work
has been on thinking over the horizon
and thinking about what preparations
do we need to put in place to give us a
long-term resilient vaccine
orientated solution to this problem and
that includes
the potential for variant vaccines for
the autumn
thanks very much fergus the clear
message from
both the the clinical community and the
nhs and from others as ministers is that
when
you're offered the jab please get the
jab and if you're 70 or over
then now please come forward to get the
jab if you haven't got your appointment
books
booked yet thanks very much the next
question
is from libbyvina itv
yes question for the secretary of state
um mr hancock um
if we can't stop transmission through
vaccination what is the plan are we
going to have to live with a large
number of cases of coronavirus for years
to come
or are we going to go for an elimination
strategy
as for example has happened in new
zealand and the question for professor
fantam if i may
um is surge testing underway for both
the south african
variant and the mutated version of the
united kingdom variant
and how many cases have actually been
picked up what is the latest data
on those variants thanks very much well
uh
libby the answer is really clear
that we have a high degree of confidence
that the vaccine will work
to to make people safe
and it is vitally important that people
come forward for
their vaccine we have a plan
for what to do if we need to
update the vaccines to work on the
new variants but we also have a plan to
keep those
new variants under control and keep them
suppressed
and currently the number of new variants
that have been
identified is 147.
so as you can see that's a relatively
small number
compared to the uh about 20 000 a day
of the old variant that we're getting
and 147 is
in total over the past uh two months
since these first started to appear
and in fact there have been no new cases
in the last
two days so we are currently
working very hard to suppress those
using the enhanced
testing and isolation at the same time
as making sure that in the future we
will have the vaccines available to
to tackle any new variant that comes
along
all that means that we can protect
people and we are going to be able to
uh take steps as the number of cases
comes down as the numbers in hospital
come down but it's it's too soon to say
anything more on the timings
of those right now professor van tan
secretary said i'm not sure i can really
add to your answer other than to say
that the
uk has really probably the
the the largest amount of um sequencing
capacity
um anywhere in the world and that
although with the number of cases we
have right now it is not possible
to sequence every single case of
coronavirus identified through testing
there will come a point when these
figures
start to fall dramatically where we will
be able to
sequence pretty much everything that we
pick up
but sorry could i just come back on that
are we are we aiming for eliminating
coronavirus or are we going to have to
live with cases in the community for
years to come
well of course everybody would like this
disease to be completely eliminated from
this earth
but we have to make sure that we are
vigilant against it and both coming in
from abroad with the work that we're
doing at the borders where we've
strengthened measures
and also the action that we're taking
here
where the vaccine adds a huge weapon in
our
arsenals as a society for how we can
how we can deal with this um we as
professor van tan was setting out there
is work underway on whether a booster
is needed and on that i'd point you to
how we deal with flu each year
flu is dealt with through an annual
jab and the jab is updated each year
according to the
the mutations and variations that have
happened and been spotted
uh in the um in the preceding uh
few months and then is manufactured over
the summer
and then delivered into the arms of
those who are most vulnerable to flu
in the autumn and so we need to be
thinking about
how to protect people in a similar way
should a should we have a similar
approach
uh in the future but for now the
it's really important that the message
is absolutely crystal clear
to everybody watching this tonight which
is that
when the call comes get a jab the good
news is that if you're 70 or over
and you haven't yet had got that
appointment booked then come to us
and come to the nhs and we'll get that
appointment booked in
ahead of deadline on the 15th and then
we are we're doing the longer term work
that's needed to make sure that
everybody's protected
i hope that answers the question um
professor yeah
libby i think i've kind of got where
you're aiming at last
here so the key thing is to think about
to frame this in terms of
how we manage seasonal flu and we manage
it
every winter and we manage it through
vaccination
and we manage it through making sure
that
the disease burden doesn't overwhelm our
hospitals
the key with this coronavirus is again
through vaccination
to take the whole curve and shift it to
the left
so the majority the vast majority
of the illness is an illness that is
manageable
in the community as opposed to
causing enormous pressure on our
hospitals and we can do that through
vaccination
and if we do that we open up a whole way
of living normally or much more normally
again in the future
so that for me is really the key
shifting the whole curve
to the left if you like away from the
hospitals
and into a manageable community illness
through vaccination
thanks very much indeed uh victoria
mcdonald from channel 4.
uh thank you secretary of state um
you've just described the
testing program as growing at a
blistering rate
and you've praised contact tracing and
yet there are numerous reports of
contact traces that call centers being
made
redundant and in fact we have spoken to
one who said that they'd been reassured
that they would have work until may
only to be told that their jobs will go
next week
so why is this happening right now and
is this
wise right at the moment well as i say
the
performance of the nhs test and trace
has been absolutely
fantastic and we know that it took
time to build up and we always said that
it would take time
but now with those figures of the
turnaround times 98
within the net within uh of contacts
reached
within 24 hours and 97 in total of
contacts reached where we have those
contact details so it is
performing extremely well of course
we're
we're constantly working to ensure that
it delivers
that very very high quality performance
and in fact we're putting more resources
into
the areas where we have significant
concern where there's a
variant of concern so it is performing
absolutely
brilliantly and i'm very very proud of
all the people who are
who are doing that and the good news is
that also because the number of cases is
coming down
so the number of people who are positive
and therefore the number of contacts
is also coming down to thanks very much
the next question is from kate ferguson
at the sun hi this is a question for you
mr hancock and professor john van tan
there's been calls for the return of the
rule of six outside from next month
i wondered can you give brits any hopes
that this could happen
and israel is outdoor group exercise and
socializing one of the safer
restrictions to ease first
kate is very tempting to get into this
but we're not going to get into this
at all it is too early to say and it is
too early to speculate
on any of the measures that we might be
able to take
the prime minister has set out that he
will he will publish a roadmap
on the 22nd of february take into
account
all that we know by then and
i think we'll have to leave it there we
we're not getting into any speculation
about what might happen next
uh thanks very much jess elgat from the
guardian
hi there and secretary of state the uh
the prime minister said today that
strict border controls are actually more
effective
once a country has a very low internal
infection rate
so therefore should people be prepared
for that to be very tough
perhaps even tougher restrictions on
travel until there is
widespread international vaccination and
are we talking about months or maybe
even years of that
and and all another professor van time
if i may um
brits have been cautioned by ministers
and by scientists that it's too early to
book any summer holiday abroad this year
would you say that it's also too early
for people to book summer holidays
particularly those with other households
within the uk i know we've talked about
a great british summer
but now we know that a third booster jab
might be needed in the autumn
well thanks very much uh thanks very
much jess um the
the fact that we only have seen 147
uh cases that we know of of um
of of new variants here other than the
kent variant
where on from on which we know we have a
high degree of confidence that
the current vaccines work um means that
we need to protect the country from
new variants but also that those numbers
are really very low
and hence the the toughening that we
took last month to measures at the
border
and we're on track to deliver on the
stronger border measure still
from countries particularly of concern
by next monday
um the the reason it's important to get
this set up now
is that the proportion of cases coming
from abroad at the moment is obviously
very low
not least because it is currently
illegal to go on holiday anyway
and of course we want to lift these
measures as with all the other measures
as soon as is safely possible
but until we know we need to know more
about the impact of the vaccines
on all these different variants and
therefore
for now the precautionary principle is
the right approach
i don't know whether dr khannani or
professor
vantam thanks for the question and
and i can't answer it um you know i
think
it's just too early to say we don't
yet have the readouts on the success of
the vaccine program
though i expect we just start to see
those within one to two weeks
public health countermeasures
non-pharmaceutical interventions
social distancing restrictions they
will have to be released gradually
how quickly they can be released will
depend upon
three things the virus the vaccine
and the extent to which the public obey
the rules that are in place
which thankfully the vast majority
always do
and then really the more elaborate your
plans are
for summer holidays in terms of crossing
borders in terms of household mixing
given where we are now i think you just
have to say you're more you're stepping
into
um you know making guesses about the
unknown at this point and so
i can't give people a proper answer at
this point because we don't yet have
the data it's just too early
thanks very much jess and final question
is from alex rogers
of my london and yorkshire live alex
good evening uh matt hancock you've
announced a significant increase in
testing to reach businesses today
will small businesses in particular
early years and child care providers who
have been fully open throughout the
lockdown
get any help to test their staff will
employers be expected to pay for tests
for their staff and how much will it
cost them
and my second question is 147 cases of
the south african variant
have been identified in the uk including
three areas of london as previously
reported
how surge testing successfully contained
the variant from spreading beyond those
three areas
and if not where else in the capital has
it been found
thanks very much on the second part of
your question thus far we
have not found any further extension
and when we do including whether that's
through the extra testing that we've put
in
or through the the core testing system
we will absolutely publish that and it
is um
it's very important that we publish that
as quickly as possible so that people in
that local area know that there's a
know that there's a challenge on the
first part of your
um your question um
the it's completely slipped my mind
you're gonna have to ask it again i
apologize
okay sorry um i was saying um
thank you pardon uh you've been you've
announced a significant increase in
testing to reach businesses
for small businesses in particular early
years and child care providers who've
been fully open through the lockdown
will they get any help to test their
stuff yes would it be will
employees be expected to pay for it and
how much will it cost them yes
so this testing is free for now and
we're always looking to who we can
expand
this testing to and so i want
in the same way that we've been tested
we've expanded it to the nhs
to schools to
hundreds of large employers we now want
to
expand it to employers of more than 50
and obviously look at how much further
we can go after that and
the point that you make about those
providing child care
is an important one and uh is
is is part of our plans and that we'll
set out details
um in due course i don't know whether um
uh
dr khanna you want to say something
about the this expansion across the nhs
because
the the regular testing has been used in
the nhs as probably one of the first
places that it went to yes
and we've seen the effectiveness yes
absolutely so we've been um
uh using uh what's called the lateral
flow testing and asymptomatic
asymptomatic testing um across the nhs
for some time now
expanding into primary care um so that
is into general practice
pharmacy dentistry optometry and so
people have been getting used to
testing uh twice a week to make sure
that they can
um keep well um and obviously having a
subsequent test if they needed
and have adopted that really well so
it's something to be recommended
thanks very much indeed that ends the
the coronavirus daily briefing for
today thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news